{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red47\green71\blue90;\red63\green96\blue123;\red228\green235\blue240;
\red19\green153\blue211;\red240\green244\blue246;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl510\sa480\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 If you live in Calgary, you\'92ve likely already read about Leonardo DiCaprio\'92s comments, but in case you haven\'92t, here it is:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl510\partightenfactor0

\i \cf3 \cb4 \strokec3 \'93We were in Calgary and the locals were saying, \'91This has never happened in our province ever.\'92 We would come and there would be eight feet of snow, and then all of a sudden a warm gust of wind would come. It was scary. I\'92ve never experienced something so firsthand that was so dramatic. You see the fragility of nature and how easily things can be completely transformed with just a few degrees difference. It\'92s terrifying, and it\'92s what people are talking about all over the world. And it\'92s simply just going to get worse.\'94
\i0 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl510\sa480\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \strokec2 Now, if you live in Calgary (or have family that gloats!), you\'92ll recognize that he\'92s describing a Chinook, in particular, one from last year (2014) that made for {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.calgaryherald.com/technology/Balmy+January+well+above+normal+average+temperature/9473459/story.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 January patio weather}}\'a0(it was awesome).\
You can probably imagine that Calgary, the NDP-voting, carbon taxing socialist haven was {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://calgaryherald.com/storyline/that-awkward-moment-when-you-have-to-explain-a-chinook-to-leo-dicaprio"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 not super-thrilled by his comments}}\'a0(under no circumstances should you read that\'a0article's comments section). Predictably, things got {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://twitter.com/search?q=Chinook%20DiCaprio&src=typd"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 smug pretty quick}}, and descended into, well\'85\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl510\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \pard\pardeftab720\sl510\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\qc\partightenfactor0

\fs28 \cf3 \cb6 \strokec3 The Calgary Sun: the heart of Alberta socialism\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl510\sa480\partightenfactor0

\fs30 \cf2 \strokec2 Chinooks aren\'92t anything new to Calgary. Warm mid-winter winds almost certainly swept down the plains and melted all our snow long before we were burning coal. Southern Alberta even has a bunch of folklore centred around the Chinook, from {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vh6HAcC70mI)"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 Johnny Chinook}} (you should watch this)\'a0to, well, this:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl510\partightenfactor0

\i \cf3 \cb4 \strokec3 A man rode his horse to church, only to find just the steeple sticking out of the snow. So, he tied his horse to the steeple with the other horses, and went down the snow tunnel to attend services. When everybody emerged from the church, they found a Chinook had melted all of the snow, and their horses were now all dangling from the church steeple.\'a0(from {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinook_wind#Folklore"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 Wikipedia}})
\i0 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl510\sa480\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \strokec2 Although they\'92ve been happening for a long time, this doesn\'92t necessarily mean they don\'92t have anything to do with climate change. Instead of wasting time ridiculing an outsider, why not\'a0make something productive out his (simplistic) comments, and ask: \'93is it possible that there are more Chinooks now than before?\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420\sa298\partightenfactor0

\b\fs36 \cf2 The Data:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl510\sa480\partightenfactor0

\b0\fs30 \cf2 To test this, I grabbed Environment Canada daily weather data from {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://climate.weather.gc.ca/climateData/dailydata_e.html?timeframe=2&Prov=AB&StationID=2205&dlyRange=1881-10-01%7C2012-07-11&Year=1906&Month=10&cmdB1=Go&Day=1"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 Calgary Int\'92l A}} \'a0for the period 1907 \'97 2012, using my sweet little {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.headwateranalytics.com/blog/web-scraping-environment-canada-weather-data"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 web-scraper}}.\
From my breakfast research, I couldn\'92t find any climate studies that had quantitative ways to define Chinooks, but there were a few health studies ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/33/7/1751.full"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 1}}), ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.ezproxy.library.ubc.ca/sp-3.17.0a/ovidweb.cgi?QS2=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"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 2}}) that had some rough guidelines to follow. In the end, I ended up defining a Chinook as any event:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl510\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\'95	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 That occurs between November and March\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\'95	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Where the daily maximum temperature was greater than 5 C\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\'95	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 And the daily maximum temperature was 5 C greater than the day before.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl510\sa480\partightenfactor0
\cf2 I then counted the number of occurrences for each year.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420\sa298\partightenfactor0

\b\fs36 \cf2 Are there more Chinooks now than before?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl510\sa480\partightenfactor0

\b0\fs30 \cf2 Yes. Turns out that from 1907 to 1960, there was a slight decrease in the number of Chinook days, but generally multi-year averages showed about 10 to 12 days a year. From 1960 on; however, there is a significant and steady increase in the number of Chinook days, rising from an average of 10 up to almost 15 days per year. The regression line from 1960 to 2012 was significant at >99% (science is really, really sure the line is a real signal, and not random variations), and projects about a doubling of number of Chinook days every 100 years.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\qc\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs24 \cf7 \strokec7 \pard\pardeftab720\sl280\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf7 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\qc\partightenfactor0

\fs28 \cf3 \cb6 \strokec3 Blue line is a loess smoothed trendline, while the green and red lines are pre and post 1960 trends. The shaded area is a 95% confidence interval.\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs24 \cf7 \strokec7 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl500\sa480\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 \strokec2 One weakness in this analysis is that the assumptions of defining a Chinook are hardly definitive, and could have impacted the results. To check this, I re-did the same analysis, using two other scenarios (max temperature of 2C and temperature difference of 7C, and max temperature of 8C and temperature difference of 5C). Both scenarios show pretty much the same thing as the \'935 and 5\'94 assumption above: the number of Chinooks decreased until 1960, but have increased since then. Additionally, however you slice it, there are more Chinook days now than before.\uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl510\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \pard\pardeftab720\sl510\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl510\sa480\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \pard\pardeftab720\sl510\sa480\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420\sa298\partightenfactor0

\b\fs36 \cf2 Why would this happen and what does it have to do with climate change?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl510\sa480\partightenfactor0

\b0\fs30 \cf2 To think about why this would happen (and what it could have to do with climate change), it helps to think about how and why a Chinook happens. Chinooks (also called Foehn) winds (which are not unique to southern Alberta) occur when wet gets carried eastward off the Pacific Ocean. The air, heavy with water vapour, gets pushed up the westward side of the Rocky Mountains and cools. As it cools, the water vapour condenses into rain droplets. When water vapour condenses to liquid, it releases a bunch of energy to the air, which turns into heat. By the time the airmass has reached the eastern edge of the Rockies, all the water has fallen out of the air (as rain/snow), but all the heat from condensation remains. Then, as the air descends over Calgary, it graces us with abnormally warm temperatures, and lots of dry (dry!) wind, eating all 8 ft of snow and granting us hours of patio weather in December.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\qc\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs24 \cf7 \strokec7 \pard\pardeftab720\sl280\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf7 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\qc\partightenfactor0

\fs28 \cf3 \cb6 \strokec3 Taken from Wikipedia Commons.\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs24 \cf7 \strokec7 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl510\sa480\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 \strokec2 Given that we in Calgary bask in sun while those suckers in Vancouver get pounded with a {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pineapple_Express"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 Pineapple Express}}, we can make the connection between coastal weather and Chinooks.\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sea_surface_temperature#/media/File:Global_Sea_Surface_Temperature.jpg"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 Sea surface temperatures are increasing}}\'a0(more water evaporates to atmosphere, more severe storms), while surface and air temperatures are as well (hotter air holds more moisture). Given that, it doesn\'92t feel like much of a stretch to suggest that the increase in Chinooks is likely due to an increase in We(s)t Coast storms intensity and frequency, and is therefore also one more bullet point in the long list of observed recent climatic changes.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420\sa298\partightenfactor0

\b\fs36 \cf2 Post Script\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl510\partightenfactor0

\b0\fs30 \cf2 Data and R code is uploaded to my {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://github.com/mchernos/Chinook"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 GitHub}}, so you can play with the trends and tell me how (statistically) significant I am.\'a0\
}